Recently, I came home from work and found a notice on my door informing me that maintenance had been in my apartment. I was glad. Almost two weeks had passed since I put in a ticket to have my heater fixed, and although late October nights in California were entirely tolerable without a heater, they were certainly more pleasant with one. I put my key in the deadbolt, but found that it was unlocked; I reached for the handle, but found that it was locked. I was in the habit of locking the deadbolt and leaving the handle unlocked, and found this deviation from the norm to be jarring. I thought briefly that it would be nice if property management were more respectful of how tennants like their doors to be locked. I unlocked the handle, walked inside, and had an unremarkable evening alone before going to sleep.

<hr/>

Almost three years earlier. It was mid December in Portland, Oregon. It was well below freezing every single night, but we only ever got rain or hail. At that time I was completely oblivious to the weather, the season, the temperature, the city, the atmospheric pressure, the people I loved. If it were hot I would have noticed, or at least suffered on account of the heat. As things stood, I could never quite get cold enough. I spent my nights with every single window in my apartment wide open, covered in uric smelling sweat, staring through trembling eyes at the weird oily patterns that methamphetamine makes as it is crushed and dissolved into water.

The propelling force of my addiction was the idea that I could overcome it and begin a life of contented sobriety once I had tasted its extreme limit. I started injecting meth in order to get off heroin, believing it would help me power through withdrawals, not produce intolerable withdrawals of its own, and provide me with the last drug experience I needed in order to stop wanting to do drugs. The first two beliefs were proven to be correct. Though I still used it occasionally, I was no longer dependent on heroin and whenever I ran out of meth I just got sleepy and hungry. The truth of this third belief- that my experience with meth could be so spiritually satisfying as to make me stop wanting drugs- was, in my mind, still inconclusive. But after months of completely unconstrained self destruction and the near leveling of my character and will, evidence was piling up against it. But I held my quiet faith, and pursued that extreme limit driven not only by manic compulsion, but also by an approximately Christian belief that I was on the road to salvation . When I’d been up for a few days I would pose in front of the mirror with my head slumped and my arms extended in the shape of the cross.

I had no clear idea of what the ‘extreme limit’ I expected to liberate me was. It was a completely nebulous idea which I now recognize to have been a complicated way of allowing myself to give up. Sometimes I thought I might overcome my addiction by staying up for a fifth day in a row, at other times by calling off work to sleep off a five day binge, or maybe by injecting it into my neck instead of my arm, or my groin instead of my hand. Sometimes it meant mixing it with heroin, sometimes it meant completely embracing the bizarre delusions that began to set in after a few days without sleeping, giving myself permission to spend hours hiding in the closet and believing that I was a Japanese businessman. On this particular afternoon, it meant pushing an entire gram up my ankle in one shot.

I got the idea to do an entire gram in one shot a few days earlier, after reading on Quora that it was nearly impossible to overdose on meth. I had never exactly felt like I had done “too much” before, only that I had been doing it for too long, or too frequently, or too imprecisely. I had never managed to take the dosage itself too far, though I had taken it quite far. So how far could I take it? One gram felt like a nice round amount. The most I’d ever put in a single needle was probably a quarter of a gram, and it got me really really high. If I did a whole gram at once, it would make it easy to quit.

I scored downtown, on Burnside. Between the bus stop and the plaza where I was going to meet my dealer, I passed about a half dozen tents, and crossed paths with a couple of their residents. It occurred to me that I didn’t look anything like them. My recently estranged friends Kyle and Tricia, whose addictions had rendered them unable to work for several years now, had just been kicked out of Tricia’s aunt’s house. I suspected they were in tents now too, but probably not downtown.

I enjoyed spending time with them a couple years ago while I was just starting out with narcotics: smoking heroin a couple times a week, or doing a line of meth before work. We would sit around for hours at the bus station on SE Powell and 72nd, waiting for our dealer Paul to make good on his promise to wake up and stroll down from his apartment on SE Powell and 73rd. We’d tell jokes and talk about books we read when we were teenagers. Kyle would make fun of me for worrying about work. Tricia would tell me about her dad. I would report to Kyle the various milestones of my addiction- my first absess, my first withdrawal induced episode of diahreah, my first time shooting the residue on dirty cottons to get well. He would give me a warm but fatalistic smile and say something comforting. One time Tricia and I went to a park and walked around for ten minutes. One time I spent 30 minutes holding a flashlight up to the back of Tricia’s hand while she slowly dug holes in it with a 29 gauge needle, silently anticipating the red spike that would shoot up the chamber if she hit a vein- eventually her nose started running onto her hand, so she gave up and pushed it into her quadricep. The next morning she told me that she felt herself to be in God’s grace because the intramuscular shot hadn’t given her a new abscess. There was a sense in which I loved Tricia, and a sense in which my relationship with Kyle was brotherly.

A couple months earlier, when my addiction became more severe, I became terrified of them. Back when the lifestyle was still new and fun and unfamiliar, I almost envied and admired their open wounds, their giant pink hands, their unemployability, their bizarre paranoia, their coloring books, and their inability to make eye contact. But around the same time I stopped wearing t-shirts those things became real and they disgusted me. I blocked both of their phone numbers and never saw either of them again.

The last couple months I had been living very very poorly, and I knew that. But it had only been two months, and my body and mind were still relatively strong, and I believed they would remain so until I was ready to change.

My phone ran out of power while I was waiting for my dealer, but I had alerted him that this was likely to happen while I was on my way over. He didn’t arrive until about 30 minutes after the agreed upon time. Intoxicated with anticipation, I waited- not entirely aware of myself, pacing and skipping and pirouetting, not even entertaining the idea that he might not come. Waiting for meth was never greuling in the way that waiting for heroin was. It was almost part of the fun.

When I saw my dealer I took a shallow breath and started walking towards him. I had connected with him on Craigslist a few weeks ago and didn’t know his name. He was a relatively calm and stable seeming guy, probably not a user himself. I was wearing a Melvins shirt. He told me that his dad took him to a Melvins concert when he was 13, and he smiled shyly. He looked me up and down with pain in his eyes. I got uncomfortable, gave him the money, took the meth, and walked the other direction.

After I got it I went to Walgreens to buy insulin syringes. The clerk had helped me several times before and my human dignity had been worn down significantly. For that reason I didn’t even pretend to browse the glucose tablets and diabetic test strips while I waited in line. The clerk gave me the ten-pack in a brown paper bag, something which he didn’t always do. At any rate, I was grateful that he did, because on my way out I ran into a former professor of whom I was once an above average student. Our brief catching up was painful and awkward, but much less so than it would have been if I was carrying an undisguised bag of syringes. We said goodbye, and I shook the encounter off almost immediately. Only years later would I remember it, with shame and discomfort.

Home. I ran up the staircase in a state of childlike excitement, but sobered up a bit once I reached my floor, and by the time I had locked the door behind me, my manner was hallowed, dutiful, focused. I took out the bag of meth and used the back of a spoon to crush up the crystals while they were still in the bag. Once they formed a course powder, I dumped the entire bag into a metal tablespoon which Tricia had given me. I opened a bottle of Essentia alkaline water that I had bought from Walgreens, and filled the syringe up to the 40% mark. I dripped the water into the tablespoon 0.05ml at a time, stirring in between each drop. Foreplay. Every single time I did this, I was hypnotized by the way the mixture would slowly transform: from a powder, to a chalk, to something that looked like lightly mixed pancake batter, to a paste, to a cloudy brine with crystalline sediment, and, at last, to a clear solution with the consistency of hot molasses. In my mind I chanted the words “rocket fuel, rocket fuel, rocket fuel”, and then drifted off into a passive, sheeplike trance for about 15 minutes.

During the time I spent using meth heavily, I spent just as much time in docile, lobotomized states like this one as I did in violent mania.

I dropped about a third of the fluff from a q-tip into the solution, and drew it up into the syringe. It now reached just past the 80% mark. Never in my life had a shot anything this concentrated above the 20% mark. I rested my ankle on the opposite thigh, and pushed through the skin above the big vein that ran from my ankle up my inner calve. You can feel a bit of tension building as you push a syringe against the wall of a vein, and then a subtle elastic snap as you break in. It’s not unlike biting through the casing of a hotdog. If you’re sufficiently attuned to it, its the only confirmation you need that you’re ready to slam it. But I also saw a thin, almost mirage-like column of red flash up in the chamber. With uncharacteristically steady hands, I moved the plunger to the base of the syringe, and then took it out.

When you hit yourself in your arms or your neck, you feel it almost instantly. When you hit yourself anywhere below the waist, it takes a few seconds. I couldn’t wait, so I jumped into bed and threw my feet up on the wall.

The thick, acidic blood drained into my lungs and dispersed in my soul.

It felt nothing at all like what I had come to expect from meth. The light in my room became so bright it was sawing through my closed eyes. It felt like a ton of hot coals had been dropped on me, knocking the wind out of me and seering my bones and musculature. I spent two or three minutes panting on the floor, shivering, ejaculating, tearing off my clothes, and pissing myself.

It didn’t take too long to make all the physiological adaptations necessary to function, and after about five minutes, I felt relatively normal. I felt much, much, much different than I had felt before taking the shot, but I didn’t feel overwhelmed, and i certainly didn’t feel like I was on meth. I felt surprisingly sedated, even calm. It reminded me of the time Bryan hit me on the back of the head with his longboard when I was 11. I decided not to clean up after myself right away.

It was strange. I kept whispering “this is the eye of the storm” to myself. I spent close to an hour looking at myself in the mirror, touching my face, holding my trembling body, staring at the barely visible threads of blue that framed my bulging pupils. I caressed my hands, gently pressing down on the puffy lumps that had recently been emerging on the dorsal side. It would have been so nice to cry.

I drove to Safeway, where it took me two hours to decide to buy a tub of Fage yoghurt and a box of Honey Nut Cheerios. The whole time I was in the store I was completely catatonic. I would catch myself in the middle of an aisle, staring at my feet, and have no idea how long I had been there. In moments of lucidity I was terrified of what the workers and shoppers might think of me. I managed to fumble my way through self checkout and avoided interaction with another human being for the entire outing. I thought of what it would feel like to run into my mother. It didn’t even feel possible.

When I got home I put my key in the deadbolt and found that it was unlocked. I took the key out and tried to turn the handle, but discovered it was locked. I never lock the handle. I always lock the bolt. Waves of fear, waves of panic. I dropped my groceries and sprinted down the stairs. Someone had broken into my apartment. I ran outside and tried to look through the window from the parking lot. I couldn’t see anyone. I ran back up the stairs, and climbed out onto the fire escape. The windows into my apartment were two units across from the fire escape. I started to scale the balconies that ran along the side of the building. When I got to the second one, I looked through the window. There was a woman inside, and the apartment looked nothing like mine. I panicked. But soon I realized it wasn’t mine at all, mine was the next one. But I suspected this was a sign.

When I got to my balcony, my windows were wide open, as I had left them. I could see the entire studio, including the bathroom, from where I stood. Nobody was there, it was exactly how I left it. I climbed in through the window and locked the door, forgetting entirely about the yogurt and the cheerios now lying at my doorstep. I hadn’t spoken to my friend Nick for years. I decided now was a good time, and texted him a long series of frantic five word texts explaining what someone had just done to me. He never responded to me.

I calmed down after some time, and laid in bed. I put on the Bladerunner soundtrack and studied Yahoo Answers threads on my phone. The yoghurt container was slowly bloating outside my doorstep, and I lost consciousness.

<hr/>

It is nice to have the heater running again, particularly when I first open the door and cross the threshold into my apartment. At this time of year it’s pitch black outside and hovering around 40 degrees when I get home from work. To walk out of the cold and into a warm, dimly lit, carefully lived in apartment after a long day is a joy. It makes me feel safe, makes me feel proud of the small corner of the world I have carved out for myself, and in a single moment provides all the reward I need to justify the day’s labor. The first night after the heater was fixed, this pleasure was somewhat overshadowed by my confusion over the way that maintenance had locked the doors.

Last night was a Friday. I went straight from work to meet a friend for dinner, and didn’t come home until after ten. When I got home, the deadbolt was once again unlocked, the handle once again locked. There was no note from property management concerning maintenance or anyone else having been inside. I went in, opened a beer, and turned the TV on. I couldn’t quite stop thinking about the locks on the door. I ruminated and ruminated and ruminated over every possible explanation. I was irritated with myself. In my heart of hearts I was not worried about what had happened to the locks. I was confident that there was some completely benign reason why it had happened, and was only concerned that I stop thinking about it. I managed to, and fell asleep watching TV.

The next day was Saturday. I had no particular plans, and spent the morning spending time. I sort of read a magazine, sort of cleaned, sort of listened to music, shaved, and intended to but did not call my grandparents. And I kept thinking about the stupid door. On an impulse, I bought a Nest doorbell camera off Amazon. By the time the camera arrived, I had forgotten about the situation entirely, and decided that I would return the package and keep my $52. I drove to a nearby Safeway that has an Amazon returns dropbox in it. I got rid of the package and bought a sandwich from the deli. I couldn’t help but feel a little ashamed at how I’d let myself lose control of my mind.
