For her forty-sixth birthday, Sara’s brother and sister gave her a rubber cow about a half inch long. It was white with black spots, and udders, and little black hooves. They dubbed it the Lucky Cow and it graced the table amid the coupe glasses and candles at a stupendous and expensive birthday dinner for three. Sara’s sister had plucked it out of a jar by the register of a shop—a spontaneous bit of levity to go with the earrings in the birthday gift-box—and as the dinner progressed, the cow stood improbably steady on its tiny rubber legs, never falling as the waiter exchanged empty plates for full. Sara, Annie, and Aaron sipped cocktails with rosemary and orgeat at a tall table by the window. The rippled glass reflected the room and held the January darkness at bay as they licked quail grease from their fingers and gave thanks to be alive and prosperous and together—lucky indeed.

But maybe it was actually an Unlucky Cow, because that very year, on a day in September when nearly-autumn sun shone on the decay of summer, Sara could be found walking her neighborhood with the dog and a glass of whiskey, neat, having just got done telling the siblings, “I have breast cancer.”

Breast cancer was once a death sentence, but it’s different now. More like the tarot card, Major Arcana: Death. Like cancer, the card may represent a physical death, but also like cancer, it represents the death of some part of the self and rebirth into something new.

In Sara’s case (and lucky for her) the only physical death that occurred was that of a thumb-sized mass of cells that had perverted the imperative to live and grow and, left unchecked, would have killed her. There was a rebirth of sorts, into a body thirty pounds heavier, with curly hair and smaller eyes. The sluggish, imbalanced body of a woman ten years older than Sara had been the year before. Surgeons rearranged the entire front of the torso, and though Sara will always maintain that they walk on water, they couldn’t help leaving some impressive scars. Long, brown, three-dimensional, scars. Thirty tough, linear inches of once-incised, now-healed skin.

If the cancer cells themselves were the dim, art-film harbingers of death, then chemotherapy was the theme park ride, a lurching trip through an absurd landscape. While Sara reclined in a heated armchair, nurses garbed in blue (more people who walk on water) administered medicine precisely titrated to almost-but-not-quite kill her. Meanwhile, she got a foot massage and tea. Plus free, hand-knit caps, lunch, a nuzzle from the therapy dog, and scarves. So many scarves.

Then, staggering home from her last half-nap on the radiation table, in her exhausted but intact and cancer-free body, Sara began the creeping emergence into a new psyche. One who would prefer to write this essay in the third person. One which rose, not like a phoenix from fire and ash, but more like a waterlogged, hairless thing that has been soaking too long in a cold, fishy lake.

Genetic studies came back negative. Sara had no more risk factors than millions of women who don’t get cancer. She read every article about every new study that “proved” that cancer was related to the latest fill-in-the-blank cause: booze, baloney sandwiches, night shift. Her oncologist said, quit reading those articles. The best-guess cause—and he said these exact words: random bad luck.

That’s a tough set of words. The mind seeks order. Causation. It seeks an answer to the question, Why? And when answers are not forthcoming, the mind keeps seeking anyway, if only to find some neck to hang an answer on. If one adopts a lucky talisman on one’s forty-sixth birthday, then gets diagnosed with cancer, one can be forgiven for thinking that it was not so lucky after all. Random bad luck, random rubber cow. Cancer Cow.

Hard to know.

Sara still has the cow. Here at the end of the long tail of her recovery, it stands in a place of honor on her desk right up where she can see it. Amazingly, it has not fallen on the floor and gotten sucked up by the vacuum cleaner or consumed by the dog. Funny how such an inconsequential object as a half-inch rubber cow can absorb so much existential questioning. Funny that Sara would need it to.

She stands it up when it tips over, takes it on long trips, and sometimes just picks it up and holds it with her fingertips, because maybe it really is a Lucky Cow. A found-it-just-in-time cow. An access-to-quality-medical-care cow. A thank-you,-cow,-that-Sara-is-not-dead cow. But mostly because it took a swim in her boulevardier the night she sat at the tall table with her brother and sister and ate ceviche with nasturtium. When the waiter in his hoodie and sneakers used the word “vegetal” to describe an eggplant tart on the dessert menu. And Sara and her brother and sister laughed and talked and closed down that restaurant on 8th Street. And she felt unconflicted joy.

So, cow, in spite of how things panned out the year that you appeared in her life, Sara is keeping you. Insubstantial as you are, chance made you the mascot for the kind of night that makes a person want to hold on hard to life and never let go.
